Now let's discuss portfolio themes.
What are portfolio themes? Well, here are the characteristics of themes.
Themes are strategic business initiatives.
These are very high level and visionary. Themes propel a company forward.
That is, without themes, a company or organization will die.
So for wherever you work or worked, what do you think your company's themes were?
And if you do not know,
then your company may not have been doing a very good job in
communicating themes and business strategies to its employees.
So themes represent new or improved products or services.
They can create opportunities in the marketplace.
They can enhance competitive advantage.
They can increase revenue; the term top line is used for
that. And they can help avoid business costs; the term
bottom line is used for that.
Also,
themes have a longer duration of life. A theme may be
around for many quarters or a year or two.
In fact, in my aerospace experience,
a theme was launching a new commercial aircraft,
and that theme was for 20+ years.
Here are some examples of themes. Cross sell services; that is,
try and find other products or services to sell to other existing customers.
This theme could affect most systems in the company.
An example may be the system selling motorbikes could now sell accessories,
so you are cross selling accessories.
Another theme would be leveraging existing services,
so use existing technology platforms to address new and growing markets.
An example may be expand our ride sharing service to delivering food.
Lastly, improve our technological advantage.
Remove system usage friction points. That is, make our systems easier to use,
adopt, and promote.
Add cell phone access.
If you don't have a mobile app,
you will likely be left behind. Partner with company X.
There may be some great companies that you could
partner with to grow your market share.
I have only listed a few here, but you get the idea.
All of these have significant enterprise‑wide implications.
They would touch maybe every corner of a business.
The business analysis activities and skills needed at this
level are very important and critical.
Well, where do themes come from in the first place?
Well, there are many potential sources.
The board of directors of a corporation, certainly. Executives, we call them
CxOs, and what CxOs stand for most likely are CEO, CTO, CFO, CIO, et cetera, you
get the idea. Lines of business leaders, or LOBs, such as the VP of sales or the
VP of engineering. External consultants,
maybe marketing companies and other industry leaders.
Key personnel within the company that are also leaders and
visionaries. And BA's providing research and analysis that
is required in identifying, designing, and articulating themes.
It is important to note, themes drive epics. Themes need to be
decomposed into epics, and epics are development initiatives
that fulfill your investment themes.
Please keep this all in mind as you work through this module. By implementing epics, you fulfill your theme.